# Section 508 Best Practices & Testing for Mobile Applications

## Purpose
The purpose of this document is to provide best practices and test cases to ensure that Android Operating System and iOS-based mobile applications meet or exceed the standards for accessibility as established by Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act (29 U.S.C. ‘794d), as amended by the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, August 7, 1998.

The Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (ATBCB) has issued a second Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) to continue the process of updating Section 508 Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Standards and Telecommunications Act Accessibility Guidelines. Key to this process is the recommendation to adopt the World Wide Web Consortium’s (W3C) Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0, 11 December, 2008:

Advisory E205.1 Official Agency Communications. WCAG is written to be technology neutral. While oriented towards web pages which are defined as being delivered using HTTP, it is straightforward to apply the WCAG 2.0 Success Criteria and Conformance Requirements to all electronic content.[ CITATION USA11 \l 1033 ]

This testing document includes best practices for accessibility development from Google, and provides test cases that incorporate the WCAG 2.0 guidelines and testing criteria. The WCAG provides for three levels of conformance to address the needs of different groups and different situations. These three levels are defined as: A (lowest), AA, and AAA (highest). This document makes use of A and AA level criteria.

## Setup to Test Android Accessibility Features
Testing of accessibility features such as TalkBack, Explore by Touch and accessibility gestures requires setup of your testing device. This section describes how to enable these features for accessibility testing.

###Testing audible feedback
Audible accessibility feedback features on Android devices provide audio prompts that speak the screen content as you move around an application. By enabling these features on an Android device, you can test the experience of users with blindness or low-vision using your application. 

Audible feedback for users on Android is typically provided by TalkBack accessibility service and the Explore by Touch system feature. The TalkBack accessibility service comes preinstalled on most Android devices and can also be downloaded for free from Google Play. The Explore by Touch system feature is available on devices running Android 4.0 and later. 

###Testing with TalkBack
The TalkBack accessibility service works by speaking the contents of user interface controls as the user moves focus onto controls. This service should be enabled as part of testing focus navigation and audible prompts.
To enable the TalkBack accessibility service:

1. Launch the Settings application.  

2. Navigate to the Accessibility category and select it.

3. Select Accessibility to enable it.

4. Select TalkBack to enable it.

    > Note: While TalkBack is the most available Android accessibility service for users with disabilities, other accessibility services are available and may be installed by users. 

###Testing with Explore by Touch
The Explore by Touch system feature is available on devices running Android 4.0 and later, and works by enabling a special accessibility mode that allows users to drag a finger around the interface of an application and hear the contents of the screen spoken. This feature does not require screen elements to be focused using a directional controller, but listens for hover events over user interface controls. 

To enable Explore by Touch on Android 4.0 and later:

1. Launch the Settings application.  

2. Navigate to the Accessibility category and select it.  

3. Select the TalkBack to enable it.  
    
    > Note: On Android 4.1 (API Level 16) and higher, the system provides a pop-up message to enable Explore by Touch. On older versions, you must follow the step below.

4. Return to the Accessibility category and select Explore by Touch to enable it. 
    > Note: You must turn on TalkBack first; otherwise this option is not available.

###Testing focus navigation
Focus navigation is the use of directional controls to navigate between the individual user interface elements of an application in order to operate it. Users with limited vision or limited manual dexterity often use this mode of navigation instead of touch navigation. As part of accessibility testing, you should verify that your application can be operated using only directional controls.

You can test navigation of your application using only focus controls, even if your test device does not have a directional controller. The Android Emulator provides a simulated directional controller that you can use to test navigation. You can also use a software-based directional controller, such as the one provided by the Eyes-Free Keyboard to simulate use of a directional pad (D-pad) on a test device that does not have a physical D-pad.

###Testing gesture navigation
Gesture navigation is an accessibility navigation mode that allows users to navigate Android devices and applications using specific gestures. This navigation mode is available on Android 4.1 (API Level 16) and higher.

>Note: Accessibility gestures provide a different navigation path than keyboards and D-pads. While gestures allow users to focus on nearly any on-screen content, keyboard and D-pad navigation only allow focus on input fields and buttons.

To enable gesture navigation on Android 4.1 and later:
Enable both TalkBack and the Explore by Touch feature as described in the Testing with Explore by Touch. When both of these features are enabled, accessibility gestures are automatically enabled.

You can change gesture settings using Settings > Accessibility > TalkBack > Settings > Manage shortcut gestures. 

For more information about using Explore by Touch accessibility gestures, see Accessibility gestures.

>Note: Accessibility services other than TalkBack may map accessibility gestures to different user actions. If gestures are not producing the expected actions during testing, try disabling other accessibility services before proceeding.

##Setup to Test iOS Accessibility Features
Testing of accessibility features such as VoiceOver requires setup of your testing device. This section describes how to enable these features for accessibility testing.

###Testing audible feedback
VoiceOver is Apple’s screen-reading technology, which gives users control over their devices without having to see the screen. VoiceOver does this by acting as an intermediary between an application's user interface and the user's touch, providing audible descriptions of elements and actions in the application. When VoiceOver is active, users are informed where they are in the user interface, what actions they can take, and what the results of those actions will be.

An application is accessible when all user interface elements with which users can interact are accessible. A user interface element is accessible when it properly reports itself as an accessibility element. 

To be useful, however, an accessible user interface element must provide accurate and helpful information about its screen position, name, behavior, value, and type. This is the information VoiceOver speaks to users. 

###Testing with VoiceOver
To enable the VoiceOver accessibility service:

1. Go to Settings > General > Accessibility > VoiceOver.

2. Tap switch control to turn VoiceOver on.

3. Ensure Speak Hints switch is on.

4. Adjust the Speaking Rate to one desired by the tester.

>Note: Alternatively, you can turn on VoiceOver using the triple-click Home button setting, as described in Quickly Toggle VoiceOver by Triple-Clicking the Home Button

After you’ve turned VoiceOver on, you’ll notice that many familiar gestures have different effects. For example, a single tap causes VoiceOver to speak the selected item and a double tap activates the selected item. When an element is selected, VoiceOver draws a black rounded rectangle around it, which is called the VoiceOver cursor. VoiceOver users are confident navigating the interface because the VoiceOver cursor prevents them from triggering something unintentionally. See Apple’s VoiceOver Gestures List to familiarize yourself with how these gestures are utilized.  

###Emulate the VoiceOver experience with the screen curtain
To simulate the experience a visually-impaired user might have with the application, you can run it with the VoiceOver screen curtain in place. When you activate the screen curtain, VoiceOver turns off the device display so that no one can read it. Testing with the display turned off obliges you to rely on the information VoiceOver speaks and removes the temptation to use your app as a sighted user would. To turn off the display while you use VoiceOver, triple-tap the screen with three fingers. To turn the display back on, perform the same gesture again.

##Android Best Practices
###Directional controls
Verify that the application can be operated without the use of a touch screen. Attempt to use only directional controls to accomplish the primary tasks in the application. Use the keyboard and directional-pad (D-Pad) controls in the Android Emulator or use gesture navigation on devices with Android 4.1 (API Level 16) or higher. 

>Note: Keyboards and D-pads provide different navigation paths than accessibility gestures. While gestures allow users to focus on nearly any on-screen content, keyboard and D-pad navigation only allow focus on input fields and buttons.

###TalkBack audio prompts
Verify that user interface controls that provide information (graphics or text) or allow user action have clear and accurate audio descriptions when TalkBack is enabled and controls are focused. Use directional controls to move focus between application layout elements.

###Explore by Touch prompts
Verify that user interface controls that provide information (graphics or text) or allow user action have appropriate audio descriptions when Explore by Touch is enabled. There should be no regions where contents or controls do not provide an audio description.

###Touchable control sizes
All controls where a user can select or take an action must be a minimum of 48 dp (approximately 9mm) in length and width, as recommended by Android Design.

###Gestures work with TalkBack enabled
Verify that app-specific gestures, such as zooming images, scrolling lists, swiping between pages or navigating carousel controls continue to work when TalkBack is enabled. If these gestures do not function, then an alternative interface for these actions must be provided.

###No audio-only feedback
Audio feedback must always have a secondary feedback mechanism to support users who are deaf or hard of hearing. For example, a sound alert for the arrival of a message should also be accompanied by a system Notification, haptic feedback (if available) or another visual alert.

###Text field hints
For EditText fields, provide an android:hint attribute instead of a content description, to help users understand what content is expected when the text field is empty and allow the contents of the field to be spoken when it is filled.

###Custom controls with high visual context
If your application contains a custom control with a high degree of visual context (such as a calendar control), default accessibility services processing may not provide adequate descriptions for users, and you should consider providing a virtual view hierarchy for your control using AccessibilityNodeProvider.

##Custom controls and click handling
If a custom control in your application performs specific handling of user touch interaction, such as listening with onTouchEvent(MotionEvent) for MotionEvent.ACTION_DOWN and MotionEvent.ACTION_UP and treating it as a click event, you must trigger an AccessibilityEvent equivalent to a click and provide a way for accessibility services to perform this action for users. For more information, see Handling custom touch events.

###Controls that change function
If you have buttons or other controls that change function during the normal activity of a user in your application (for example, a button that changes from Play to Pause), make sure you also change the android:contentDescription of the button appropriately.

###Prompts for related controls
Make sure sets of controls which provide a single function, such as the DatePicker, provide useful audio feedback when a user interacts with the individual controls.

###Video playback and captioning
If your application provides video playback, it must support captioning and subtitles to assist users who are deaf or hard of hearing. Your video playback controls must also clearly indicate if captioning is available for a video and provide a clear way of enabling captions.

###Supplemental accessibility audio feedback
Use only the Android accessibility framework to provide accessibility audio feedback for your app. Accessibility services such as TalkBack should be the only way your application provides accessibility audio prompts to users. Provide the prompting information with an android:contentDescription XML layout attribute or dynamically add it using accessibility framework APIs. For example, if your application takes action that you want to announce to a user, such as automatically turning the page of a book, use the announceForAccessibility(CharSequence) method to have accessibility services speak this information to the user.

###Custom controls with complex visual interactions
For custom controls that provide complex or non-standard visual interactions, provide a virtual view hierarchy for your control using AccessibilityNodeProvider that allows accessibility services to provide a simplified interaction model for the user. If this approach is not feasible, consider providing an alternate view that is accessible.

###Sets of small controls
If you have controls that are smaller than the minimum recommended touch size in your application screens, consider grouping these controls together using a ViewGroup and providing an android:contentDescription for the group.

###Decorative images and graphics
Elements in application screens that are purely decorative and do not provide any content or enable a user action should not have accessibility content descriptions.

##iOS Best Practices
To be accessible, an iOS application must supply information about its user interface elements to VoiceOver users. At a high level, this means you should make sure that:

1. Every user interface element with which users can interact is accessible. This includes elements that merely supply information, such as static text, as well as controls that perform actions.

2. All accessible elements supply accurate and helpful information.
In addition to these fundamentals, there are also a few things you can do to enhance a VoiceOver user’s experience with table views and to make sure dynamic elements in your application are always accessible.

###Make user interface elements accessible
As mentioned in the Accessibility and VoiceOver section of Apple’s Accessibility Programming guide for iOS, a user interface element is accessible if it reports itself as an accessibility element. Although being accessible is not enough to make a user interface element useful to VoiceOver users, it represents the first step in the process of making your application accessible.

As stated in iOS Accessibility API and Tools, standard UIKit controls and views are automatically accessible. If you use only standard UIKit controls, you probably don’t have to do much additional work to make sure your application is accessible. In this case, your next step is to ensure that the default attribute information supplied by these controls makes sense in your application. To learn how to do this, see Supply Accurate and Helpful 

###Attribute Information.
If you create custom views that display information or with which users need to interact, you must ensure the accessibility of these views yourself. After you’ve done this, you need to make sure these views supply accessibility information that helps people use them (see Supply Accurate and Helpful Attribute Information).

From the perspective of accessibility, a custom view is either an individual view or a container view. An individual view does not contain any other views that need to be accessible. For example, a custom subclass of UIControl that displays an icon and behaves like a button does not contain any other elements with which the user can interact, apart from the button itself. Read Make Custom Individual Views Accessible to learn how to make an individual view accessible.

A container view, on the other hand, contains other elements with which users can interact. For example, in a custom subclass of UIView that performs its own drawing of geometric shapes, the shapes represent elements with which users can interact and which are distinct from the container view. Such separate elements within a container view are not automatically accessible (because they are not subclasses of UIView) and do not provide any accessibility information. To learn how to make the contents of a container view accessible, read Make the Contents of Custom Container Views Accessible.

###Make custom individual views accessible
If your application contains a custom individual view with which users need to interact, you must make the view accessible. (Recall that an individual view is a view containing no other views with which users interact.)

In addition to using Interface Builder to make a custom individual view accessible, there are two programmatic ways to do this. One way is to set your custom view’s accessibility status in the code that instantiates it.

###Make the contents of custom container views accessible
If your application displays a custom view that contains other elements with which users interact, you need to make the contained elements separately accessible. At the same time, you need to make sure that the container view itself is not accessible. The reason is that users interact with the contents of the container, not with the container itself.

To accomplish this, your custom container view should implement the UIAccessibilityContainer protocol. This protocol defines methods that make the contained elements available in an array. 

The following code snippet shows the partial implementation of a custom container view. Note that this container view creates the array of accessible elements only when methods of the UIAccessibilityContainer protocol are called. As a result, if iPhone accessibility is not currently active, the array is not created.

###Supply accurate and helpful attribute information
There are two parts to the process of supplying attribute information for accessible elements:

1. Crafting concise, accurate, and helpful information

2. Ensuring that the accessible elements in your application report that content correctly

If you use custom views, you must supply all appropriate attribute information for them. For guidance, see Crafting Useful Labels and Hints, Guidelines for Creating Hints, and Identifying Appropriate Traits.
Even if you use only standard UIKit controls and views, you might find that some of the default attribute information they supply could be enhanced to make more sense in the context of your application. For more information, see 

###Enhancing Default Attribute Information.
If you need to supply or change accessibility attributes on either standard or custom UI elements, you can do so either in Interface Builder (see Defining Custom Attribute Information in Interface Builder) or programmatically (see Defining Custom Attribute Information Programmatically).
Enhancing default attribute information
As part of the built-in accessibility of standard UIKit controls and views, iOS also provides default attribute information that describes these elements to VoiceOver users. In most cases, this information is appropriate for applications that use the standard controls and views. However, there might be times when supplying custom attribute information can enhance a VoiceOver user’s experience with your application:
1. If you use a standard UIKit control or view that displays a system-provided icon or title, first make sure you’re using it in accordance with its intended purpose (see iOS Human Interface Guidelines for more information). Then, decide whether the default label attribute accurately conveys the result of using that control or view in your application. If not, consider providing a hint attribute.
a. For example, if you place an Add button in your navigation bar by using the system-provided Add (+) icon in a UIBarButtonItem object, you get the default label attribute, Add, automatically. If it’s always obvious which item the user is adding when they activate this button, there’s no need to provide a hint attribute. But if there might be confusion, you should consider providing a custom hint that describes the result of using that control in your application, such as "Adds an account" or "Adds a comment."
4. If you display a custom icon or image in a standard UIKit view, such as a UIButton object, you need to supply a custom label attribute that describes it.
Guidelines for creating labels
The label attribute identifies the user interface element. Every accessible user interface element, standard and custom, must supply content for the label attribute. 
Note: A table row can also have a label attribute. However, the guidelines for creating a table row’s label differ from the guidelines for creating labels for other types of controls and views. See Enhance the Accessibility of Table Views to learn how to create useful labels for table rows.
A good way to determine what a label should convey is to think about what a sighted user infers about your application just by looking at it. If you’ve designed a good user interface, sighted users should know what a control or view does in the current application context by reading its title or understanding its icon. This is the information you need to make available to VoiceOver users in the label attribute.
If you provide a custom control or view, or if you display a custom icon in a standard control or view, you need to provide a label that:
1. Very briefly describes the element: 
a. Ideally, the label consists of a single word, such as Add, Play, Delete, Search, Favorites, or Volume. 
b. Strive to design your application so that a single word identifies an element and makes its usage obvious in the current context. Sometimes, however, it might be necessary to use a brief phrase to properly identify an element. When this is the case, create a very short phrase, such as “Play music,” “Add name,” or “Add to event.” 
2. Does not include the type of the control or view: 
a. The type information is contained in the traits attribute of the element and should never be repeated in the label. 
b. For example, if you include the control type in the label of an Add button, VoiceOver users hear “Add button button” every time they access that control. This experience would quickly become annoying and might motivate users to stop using your application.
3. Begins with a capitalized word: 
a. This helps VoiceOver read the label with the appropriate inflection.
4. Does not end with a period: 
a. The label is not a sentence and therefore should not end with a period.
5. Is localized: 
a. Be sure to make your application available to as wide an audience as possible by localizing all strings, including accessibility attribute strings. In general, VoiceOver speaks in the language that the user specifies in International settings.
Guidelines for creating hints
The hint attribute describes the results of performing an action on a control or view. You should provide a hint only when the results of an action are not obvious from the element’s label.
For example, if you provide a Play button in your application, the context in which the button appears should make it easy for users to understand what happens when they tap it. However, if you allow users to play a song by tapping the song title in a list, you might want to provide a hint that describes this result. The reason is that the label of the list item describes the item itself (in this case, the song title), not what happens when a user taps it.
Note: VoiceOver users can choose whether to hear available hints by selecting an option in VoiceOver settings on their device. Spoken hints are turned on by default.
If the results of a user’s action on a control or view are not clearly implied by its label, create a hint that:
1. Very briefly describes the results:
a. Even though few controls and views need hints, strive to make the hints you do need to provide as brief as possible. Doing so decreases the amount of time users must spend listening before they can use the element.
a. That said however, avoid sacrificing clarity and good grammar for brevity. For example, changing “Adds a city” to “Adds city” does not significantly decrease the length of the hint, but does make it sound awkward and a bit less clear.
5. Begins with a verb and omits the subject:
a. Be sure to use the third-person singular declarative form of a verb, such as “Plays,” and not the imperative, such as “Play.” You want to avoid using the imperative, because using it can make the hint sound like a command. For example, you don’t want to tell users to “Play the song”; instead, you want to tell users that tapping the element “Plays the song.”
b. To help you find the right word, imagine that you’re describing the use of a control to a friend. You might say something like “Tapping this control plays the song.” Often, you can use the second phrase in such a sentence (in this case, “Plays the song”) as a hint.
6. Begins with a capitalized word and ends with a period:
a. Even though a hint is a phrase, not a sentence, ending the hint with a period helps VoiceOver speak it with the appropriate inflection.
7. Does not include the name of the action or gesture:
a. A hint does not tell users how to perform the action, it tells users what will happen when that action occurs. Therefore, do not create hints such as “Tap to play the song,” “Tapping purchases the item,” or “Swipe to delete the item.”
b. This is especially important because VoiceOver users can use VoiceOver-specific gestures to interact with elements in your application. If you name a different gesture in a hint, it would be very confusing.
8. Does not include the name of the control or view:
a. The user gets this information from the label attribute, so you should not repeat it in the hint. Therefore, do not create hints such as “Save saves your edits” or “Back returns to the previous screen.”
9. Does not include the type of the control or view:
a. The user already knows whether, for example, the control or view behaves like a button or a search field, because this information is available in the element’s traits attribute. Therefore, do not create hints such as “Button that adds a name” or “Slider that controls the scale.”
10. Is localized:
a. As with accessibility labels, hints should be available in the user’s preferred language.
Identifying appropriate traits
The traits attribute contains one or more individual traits that, taken together, describe the behavior of an accessible user interface element. Because some individual traits can be combined to describe a single element, the element’s behavior can be precisely characterized.
Note: Individual traits are combined using the OR operator. Outside of code examples, this document uses the shorter terms “combine” and “combination” without specifying the method of combination. 
A standard UIKit control, such as a button or text field, provides default content in the traits attribute. If you use only standard UIKit controls in your application (and do not customize their behavior in any way), you do not have to make any changes to the traits attribute of these controls.
If you customize the behavior of a standard control, you might need to combine a new trait with the control’s default traits. If you create a custom control or view, you need to provide content for the element’s traits attribute. 
The UI Accessibility programming interface defines 12 individual traits, some of which can be combined. Some traits characterize an element by identifying its behavior with the behavior of a particular type of control (such as a button) or type of object (such as an image). Other traits characterize an element by describing a specific behavior the element can exhibit, such the ability to play sound. 
You use the following traits to characterize elements in your application:
1. Button
11. Link
12. Search Field
13. Keyboard Key
14. Static Text
15. Image
16. Plays Sound
17. Selected
18. Summary Element
19. Updates Frequently
20. Not Enabled
21. None
In general, traits that correspond to controls can successfully be combined with traits that describe behaviors. For example, you might combine the Button trait with the Plays Sound trait to characterize a custom control that behaves like a button and plays sound when it is tapped.
For the most part, you should consider the traits that correspond to particular controls, specifically, the Button, Link, Search Field, and Keyboard Key traits, to be mutually exclusive. That is, you should not use more than one of these traits to characterize an element in your application. Instead, think about which one of these four traits corresponds most closely to the element in your application. Then, if your element has additional behaviors, you can combine the first trait with one of the behavioral traits.
For example, suppose you display an image in your application that responds to a user’s tap by opening a link in Safari on iPhone. You could characterize this element by combining the Image and Link traits. Another example is a keyboard key that modifies other keyboard keys when it is tapped. You could characterize this element by combining the Keyboard Key and Selected traits.
To see some examples of how traits characterize controls, you can use Accessibility Inspector to see the default traits that are set on the standard controls. For information on how to use Accessibility Inspector, read Debug Accessibility in iOS Simulator with the Accessibility Inspector.
Defining custom attribute information in interface builder
When you install iOS SDK 3.0, you get a version of Interface Builder that includes features that help you make your application accessible. If your application contains standard UIKit controls and views, you might be able to do all your accessibility work in Interface Builder.
Using Interface Builder, you can set an element’s accessibility status and provide custom content for the label, hint, and traits attributes. To do this, select the user interface element in your nib file and open the Identity inspector. 
Defining custom attribute information programmatically
If you prefer, you can supply custom information for attributes programmatically. You might want to do this if you’re not using Interface Builder at all or if you generate your views in code instead of using Interface Builder.
As described in Make Custom Individual Views Accessible, you can set accessibility information in the implementation of your view subclass or in the code that instantiates the view. Both techniques are valid, but there is one reason why you might want to implement attribute methods in your subclass instead of setting attributes in the instantiation code: If your view displays data that is dynamic or that changes frequently, such as the time of day, you should implement the subclass methods to return fresh data as needed. For those situations, if you only set attributes when you instantiate the subclass, the returned data is likely to be out of date.
