###Overview
Because of differing use cases and form factors, the success and functioning of mobile applications are different from websites in terms of analytics. Further, because of the unique use cases for each application in the Mobile Applications program, each application will need to have different Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to determine success.

To date, many organizations have predominately used “number of downloads” as their primary indicator of application success. However, because this number only indicates the total number of people who have downloaded the application to date, it can at best give an indication of the reach of the application but provides little information on the actual usage. According to a [2014 report](http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/market-data-research/other/research-publications/adults/adults-media-lit-14/?utm_source=updates&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=media-lit-adults-14), up to 2/3rd of apps that are downloaded to a mobile device are subsequently never used. For this reason, the number of downloads can only indicate interest in, not successfully engaging users with, your application.

Even more challenging than the lack of a unifying metric is that, since each application differs in its expected use, different combinations of KPIs would need to be used for each application. For example, an application like [T2 MoodTracker](http://t2health.dcoe.mil/apps/t2-mood-tracker) is intended to be used multiple times per day. The number of Daily Average Users then, would be a good metric of success - a higher number indicating more use of the app on a daily basis. On the other hand, an application like mTBI Pocket Guide is not likely to be used every day, rather it is designed to stay on the phone until needed on the odd occasion. Even further, apps like Breathe2Relax are not intended to be used on a consistent basis - so if it were used as intended, the number of Daily Average Users should naturally fluctuate over time as people acquire the skill and no longer need the application.

Ultimately, it will be the ROI and CBA models currently being developed that will provide the best direct comparison of application performance. Because these models will serve as the unifying factor, the KPIs can be more tailored to focus on application performance in terms of how they compare with their intended use.

Additionally, by analyzing applications according to their expected use, both by how we can expect a patient to use the app as compared to a provider, we can potentially segment our audience and get a better look at how different classes of users are engaging with the app.